=head3 B<5.2.1. Installing a package>

Installing a package is done by using L<pkgadd(8)>.  This utility
requires at least one argument, the package you want to install.
Example:

    # pkgadd bash#5.0.18-1.pkg.tar.gz

When installing a package the package manager will ensure that no
previously installed files are overwritten.  If conflicts are found,
an error message will be printed and L<pkgadd(8)> will abort without
installing the package.  The error message will contain the names of
the conflicting files.  Example:

    # pkgadd bash#5.0.18-1.pkg.tar.gz
    bin/sh
    usr/share/man/man1/sh.1.gz
    pkgadd error: listed files already installed
        (use -f to ignore and overwrite)

To force the installation and overwrite the conflicting files, you
can use the option B<-f>/B<--force>.  Example:

    # pkgadd -f bash#5.0.18-1.pkg.tar.gz

The package system allows a file to be owned by exactly one package.
When forcing an installation the ownership of the conflicting files
will be transferred to the package that is currently being installed.
Directories can however be owned by more than one package.

=begin man

.TS
center, box, tab (|) ;
c
c.
\fB<WARNING>\fR
_
.SP
It is often not a good idea to force the installation
unless you really know what you are doing.  If a package
conflicts with already installed files it could be a sign
that the package is broken and installs unexpected files.
Use this option with extreme care, preferably not at all.
.TE

=end man

=begin html

    <table>
        <tr>
            <th>WARNING</th>
        </tr>

        <tr>
            <td>
                It is often not a good idea to force the installation
                unless you really know what you are doing.  If a
                package conflicts with already installed files it
                could be a sign that the package is broken and
                installs unexpected files.  Use this option with
                extreme care, preferably not at all.
            </td>
        </tr>
    </table>

=end html

=begin text

=over

=item B<Warning>:

It is often not a good idea to force the installation
unless you really know what you are doing.  If a package
conflicts with already installed files it could be a sign
that the package is broken and installs unexpected files.
Use this option with extreme care, preferably not at all.

=back

=end text

As earlier, the package file itself does not contain any metadata.
Instead, the L<pkgadd(8)> uses the package filename to determine the
package name and version.  Thus, when installing a package file named
I<bash#5.0.18-1.pkg.tar.gz>, L<pkgadd(8)> will interpret this as a
package named I<bash> at version I<5.0.18-1>.  If L<pkgadd(8)> is
unable to interpret the filename (e.g. B<#> is missing or the filename
does not end with .pkg.tar.gz) an error message will be printed and
L<pkgadd(8)> will abort without installing the package.

=cut
