=head3 B<6.1.3. The pkgsrc collections>

Packages' sources are organized in so-called collections.  There are
four official collections:

=over 2

=item 1. I<pkgsrc-core>

This collection contains build scripts and files for the packages
required to create a basic system, on the basis of which you can build
your installation.  The official rootfs images are built based on this
collection.

Of course, this collection shouldn't have dependencies outside itself.
To enforce this rule during maintenance see
L<Makefile|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/pkgsrc-core/blob/master/Makefile>
in the collection root directory.  This F<Makefile> checks collection
files for typical errors, including misconfigured dependencies, and is
included in the other collections too.  Also, see
L<pkgmaint|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/pkgmaint> and corresponding
B<system/pkgmaint> package for various package maintaining utilities.
It will not be superfluous to mention L<revdep(1)>.

=item 2. I<pkgsrc-system>

This collection contains build scripts and files for the packages
required for minimal installation on real hardware: boot loader,
filesystem utilities, hw-monitors, servers, and so on.  Packages in
this collection depend B<only> on the C<pkgsrc-core> collection.

=item 3. I<pkgsrc-xorg>

This collection contains build scripts and files for the packages
required for X Window System applications.  Packages in this
collection depend on the C<pkgsrc-system> collection.

=item 4. I<pkgsrc-desktop>

This collection contains build scripts and files for the packages
typically used on a desktop: web browser, music/video player, file
manager, chat messenger, etc.  Packages in this collection depend on
the C<pkgsrc-xorg> collection.

=back

In addition to the official ones, there are unofficial collections of
packages:

=over 2

=item * I<pkgsrc-stuff>

This collection contains build scripts and files for the packages that
do not fit into the above categories.  Packages in this collection may
depend on any of the collections listed above.  Since this collection
contains packages of different (often dubious) quality and purpose, we
will not use it in the examples and warn you that if you can live
without it - it's better to do so.

=item * I<pkgsrc-games>

This collection contains build scripts and files for the games and
emulators.

=item * I<pkgsrc-wmaker>

This collection contains build scripts and files for Window Maker &
dockapps packages.

=back

=cut

# vim: sw=4 ts=4 sts=4 et cc=72 tw=70
