=head2 4.4. Install Base System

=head3 B<4.4.1. Download rootfs tarball>

As mentioned before, the C</mnt> directory is the default mountpoint
for our system.  Let's download the rootfs tarball into this directory
so we won't pollute live CD/DVD/USB RAM:

    # cd /mnt
    # wget -c https://github.com/zeppe-lin/pkgsrc-core/releases/download/v0.99.1/rootfs-v0.99.1-x86_64.tar.xz{,.sig}

=head3 B<4.4.2. Verify downloaded tarball>

Zeppe-Lin rootfs tarball is signed using GPG.
It's a good practice to verify authenticity and integrity of
downloaded files when possible.

    # gpg --keyserver keyserver.ubuntu.com --recv-keys 59ec1986fbd902cf
    # gpg --verify rootfs-v0.99.1-x86_64.tar.xz{.sig,}

=head3 B<4.4.3. Extract rootfs tarball>

Once the rootfs tarball is downloaded and verified, extract the
contents with the following command:

    # tar --numeric-owner --xattrs --xattrs-include='*' -xpf \
        rootfs-v0.99.1-x86_64.tar.xz

=over

=item B<Important>:

It is very important to use all the options included above.  See below
for details.

=back

Here are what the options to L<tar(1)> do:

=over

=item B<--numeric-owner>

Without this option, L<tar(1)> will map ownership and group ownership
based on the UID to user and GID to group mappings as defined on the
Live CD/DVD/USB.  By specifying B<--numeric-owner> we tell that we
want the I<numeric values> of the UIDs and GIDs in the tarball to be
preserved on disk, so when your Zeppe-Lin system boots, the UIDs and
GIDs are set correctly for Zeppe-Lin.

=item B<--xattrs --xattrs-include='*'>

Zeppe-Lin uses filesystem extended attributes to set Linux
capabilities, which allow for certain programs such as ping to have
enhanced privileges without having to be fully 'suid root'.  Even with
the B<-p> option, L<tar(1)> will not restore extended attributes we
need unless these two options are specified.

=item B<-xpf>

Extract (B<x>), preserve regular permissions and ownership (B<p>), and
use the filename (B<f>) specified.

=back

=cut

# vim: sw=4 ts=4 sts=4 et cc=72 tw=70
