=head2 5.1. Introduction

=head3 B<5.1.1. Basic package management tools>

The package system (B<pkgutils>) is a fork of CRUX's pkgutils.
It is made with simplicity in mind, where all packages are plain
I<tar.gz> files (i.e. without any kind of metadata).

Packages follow the naming convention
I<name#version-release.pkg.tar.gz>, where I<name> is the name of the
program, I<version> is the version number of the program, and
I<release> is the version number of the package.

The I<pkg.tar.gz> extension is used (instead of just I<tar.gz>) to
indicate that this is not just any I<tar.gz> file, but a I<tar.gz>
that is meant to be installed using L<pkgadd(8)>.  This helps
distinguish packages from other I<tar.gz> files.  Note that
L<pkgmk(8)> supports additional compression schemes like B<bzip2> with
the I<tar.bz2> extension, B<lzip> with I<tar.lz>, B<xz> with I<tar.xz>,
or B<zstd> ending with I<tar.zst>.

L<pkgadd(8)>, L<pkgrm(8)>, and L<pkginfo(1)> are the basic package
management utilities and are part of the package B<pkgutils>.  In
addition to them, package management includes utilities such as
L<pkgmk(8)>, L<rejmerge(8)>, and L<revdep(1)>.

They could also be considered basic, but they are placed in separate
packages so that changes in one utility do not require rebuilding all
of them.

With these utilities, you can install, uninstall, inspect, make
packages, query the package database, merge files that were rejected
during package upgrades, and check for missing libraries of installed
packages.

When a new package is installed using L<pkgadd(8)>, a new record is
added to the package database (stored in F</var/lib/pkg/db>).  The
basic package system does not have any kind of dependency checking,
this will not warn you if you install a package that requires other
packages to be installed.  The included L<pkgman(1)> tool (B<pkgman>),
however, does support dependencies.

The following sections will describe in short how to use the package
utilities.  Additional information about these utilities can be found
on their respective manpage.

=cut

# vim: cc=72 tw=70
