=head3 B<5.2.2. Upgrading a package>

Upgrading a package is done using L<pkgadd(8)> with the B<-u> option.
Example:

    # pkgadd -u bash#5.0.18-1.pkg.tar.gz

This will replace the previously installed bash package with the new
one.  If you have not previously installed bash, L<pkgadd(8)> will
print an error message.  L<pkgadd(8)> does not care about the version
number of the package in that you can "upgrade" version 2.05-1 with
version 2.04-1 (or even with version 2.05-1 itself).  The installed
package will be replaced with the specified package.

Upgrading a package is equivalent to executing L<pkgrm(8)> followed by
L<pkgadd(8)> with one (big) exception.  When upgrading a package (with
C<pkgadd -u>) you have the option to prevent some of the already
installed files from getting replaced.  This is typically useful when
you want to preserve configuration and log files.

When executing L<pkgadd(8)> the file F</etc/pkgadd.conf> will be read.
This file can contain rules describing how L<pkgadd(8)> should behave
when doing upgrades.  A rule is built out of three fragments:
I<event>, I<pattern>, and I<action>.  The I<event> describes in what
kind of situation this rule applies.  Currently, only one type of
event is supported, that is UPGRADE.  The I<pattern> is a filename
pattern expressed as a regular expression and the I<action> applicable
to the UPGRADE event is YES or NO.  More than one rule of the same
event type is allowed, in which case the first rule will have the
lowest priority and the last rule will have the highest priority.
Example:

    #
    # /etc/pkgadd.conf: pkgadd(8) configuration
    #

    UPGRADE       ^etc/.*$                NO
    UPGRADE       ^var/log/.*$            NO
    UPGRADE       ^etc/X11/.*$           YES
    UPGRADE       ^etc/X11/xorg.conf$     NO

    # End of file.

The above example will cause L<pkgadd(8)> to never upgrade anything in
F</etc/> or F</var/log/> (subdirectories included), except files in
F</etc/X11/> (subdirectories included), unless it's the file
F</etc/X11/xorg.conf>.  The default rule is to upgrade everything,
rules in this file are exceptions to that rule.

B<Note>: A pattern should never contain an initial "/" since you are
referring to the files in the package, not the files on the disk.

See L<pkgadd.conf(5)> for more information.

=cut
